>> Hi, I'm Joel Sokol,
Director of the Master of Science in
Analytics degree at Georgia Tech,
and a Professor in Georgia Tech's Stewart School of ISyE.
In this lesson, we'll talk about Detrending Data.
What it means, when you'd want to do it,
and a basic method for detrending.
As you might have already seen in
the lessons on time series data,
the word trend refers to data
that's increasing or decreasing over time.
For example, here's a graph
of the price of gold at the end of the year,
and over time, you can see that overall
the price of gold has been increasing over time.
But that's not the whole story.
Because of inflation,
the relative value of a dollar has been decreasing,
and that gives an upward trend to the gold price,
just like to the price of almost anything else.
If we adjust for inflation rates over time,
we get this graph.
Once we've adjusted for inflation,
we can see more clearly
the true fluctuations in the price
of gold relative to other things,
without the upward trend getting in the way.
That's what detrending can do.
And the reason we want to do it is,
because the trend in the time series could
mess up a factor-based analysis.
For example, suppose we
wanted to use a regression model to
estimate the price of gold as
a function of other factors.
With the trend in the price of gold,
we can have the same factor values in 1974 and 2009,
but we'd have a very different response value.
On the other hand, after taking
away the effect of inflation,
we can see that the baseline price of gold
adjusted for inflation is
about the same in those two years.
And it's not just the response
that we might want to detrend.
It might be that some of
the predictors also should be detrended.
In general, you should at least consider detrending
whenever you're going to use
a factor-based model like regression,
support vector machines, etc,
to analyze time-series data.
That just leaves the question of how to detrend.
In the gold price example,
I was able to cheat a little bit.
There are plenty of websites where you can
find historical inflation rates,
so it was pretty easy for me to
adjust each data point individually,
by the amount of historical inflation.
But in most cases,
we don't know what the trend has been in the past,
except for the data we're trying to detrend.
So one simple way of doing
the detrending is to go factor by
factor and fit a one-dimensional regression to it.
Usually, that's a linear fit like y
equals a plus a1 times x,
but you could use a more complicated function too.
Let's see, the gold price is again,
using a linear fit.
A simple linear regression
gives us the estimate that the price equals
negative 45,600 plus 23.2 times a year.
To de-trend the data,
we just subtract the trend line estimate
from the real price.
So the de-trended price is the actual price minus
negative 45,600 plus 23.2 times the year.
As you can see, it's not so
different from the inflation-adjusted graph.
It's a little different because
the linear fit assumes a constant rate of inflation,
and the inflation-adjusted graph accounts
for different inflation rates year by year.
But if you don't have inflation data,
you can see that the simple Detrending procedure
still works pretty well.
And that's all it is,
compared to a lot of other analytics models,
this Detrending approach is pretty simple,
and it usually works pretty well as a way to
remove trend effects from time series data.
When you want to use that data
in a factor-based analysis.